# Spatio-Temporal Drivers of Variation in Blue Tit Survival
#### Institution: University of Edinburgh
#### Exam number: B250279
#### Course: MSc Ecology Evolution & Biodiversity
This repository contains all the code and data used to run the analyses associated with my master's project (as well as the figures and tables used in the final thesis). The code is fully annotated and should be relatively straightforward to run.
## Before you start
Any packages that may be required to run the code are given at the top of each R file. However, this code was generated in R version 4.4.0 and some packages may be out of date.
The filename of this R project was changed shortly after the project was completed and file directories for uploading any data must be updated accordingly.
## Data
Data on blue tits was obtained from the Phenoweb project and Dan Hollis provided weather data from the Met Office (references provided at the bottom). 
### Adults dataset
Raw data consisting of capture histories for adult blue tits along with associated data on sex, age, nest box etc.
### Adults2, 5 & 7
Modified versions of the Adults dataset. Adults 7 is required to run the CJS analyses.
### Bird_Phenology data
Raw data on blue tit phenology and nesting (used to generate occupancy data).
### Occupancy data
Data on nest box occupancy (representative of breeding densities at the sites).
### Weather data
Raw site interpolated weather data (generated by Dan Hollis at the Met Office) was used to generate metrics that represent mean daily winter temperature and total winter precipitation. 
### blue_tit_survival
Combines capture histories with data on weather and density effects for use in the GLMM.
## Nestlings/site_details data (used for additional investigation)
Used for additional investigations of nestling recapture/recruitment and variation in weather conditions between sites.
## Figs
Contains figures used in the thesis, as well as some additional rough figures.
## Results
Contains tables representing GLMM and CJS model outputs.
## Code for analyses
Some file names indicate the order in which the code should be run (i.e. step1, step2 etc). This is particularly important for the data manipulation which needs to be done in sequence.
### Step_1_Adult__Recapture_Data_Exploration_Manipulation_&_Processing
Exploring/manipulating blue tit capture histories and associated data on predictors that vary on the individual level (i.e. sex and age). Contains code used to generate Adults7.
### Step_2_Bird_Phenology_Data_Exploration_Manipulation_&_Processing_2
Exploring/manipulating raw data on blue tit phenology and nesting. Contains code used to generate the occupancy dataset.
### Step_3_Combining_Adults7_&_Occupancy
Combining individual level data with data representing density effects to generate the blue_tit_survival dataset.
### Step_4_Weather_Data_Exploration
Exploring the weather data.
### Step_5_Calculating_Weather_Metrics
Calculating mean daily minimum winter temperatures and total winter precipitation values for each site in each year. 
### Step_6_Adding_Weather_Metrics_to_Blue_Tit_Survival
Incorporating weather metrics into the blue_tit_survival dataset.
### Step_7_Adult_Survival_GLMM
Code to run Generalised linear mixed models (GLMMs) and associated analyses. Models survival probability of adult blue tits in response to density effects, weather, sex and age.
### Step_8_Adult_Survival_CJS_Model
Code to run Cormack-Jolly-Seber (CJS) models. Simultaneously estimates survival probability and detection probability as well as modelling their variation between years and sites.
### GLMM_plots_&_tables
Code for generating plots and tables using the GLMMs.
### Data_Visualisation_&_Further_Exploration
Exploration and visualisation of raw data (can be done before or after data manipulation and modelling).
## Contact information
Email: eyo.alexander@gmail.com
## References associated with datasets
Phenoweb (2024). https://phenoweb.org/.
Met Office; Hollis, D.; McCarthy, M.; Kendon, M.; Legg, T. (2023): HadUK-Grid Gridded Climate Observations on a 1km grid over the UK, v1.2.0.ceda (1836-2022). NERC EDS Centre for Environmental Data Analysis, 30 August 2023. doi:10.5285/46f8c1377f8849eeb8570b8ac9b26d86. https://dx.doi.org/10.5285/46f8c1377f8849eeb8570b8ac9b26d86
NB: The weather data was generated especially for use in this project and is not directly available from the Met Office. 

